[823] Configurable mqtt bind address (#929)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/howto-guides/008_config_local_mqtt_bind_address_and_port.md

# How to configure the local port and bind address in mosquitto?

> Configuring a mosquitto port and bind address in thin edge is a three step process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuring a mosquitto port and bind address in thin-edge.io is a three-step process.
```

Author: fixed

> Note: The mqtt.port and the mqtt.bind_address can be set/unset independently.

> ## Step 1: Disconnect the thin edge device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Disconnect the thin-edge.io device
```

> The thin edge device has to be disconnected from the cloud using the `tedge` command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The thin-edge.io device has to be disconnected from the cloud using the `tedge` command.
```

```shell
tedge disconnect c8y/az
```

## Step 2: Set and verify the new mqtt port and bind address

Use the `tedge` command to set the mqtt.port and mqtt.bind_address with a desired port and bind address as below.

```shell
tedge config set mqtt.port 1024
```

```shell
tedge config set mqtt.bind_address 127.0.0.1
```

> Note: The bind_address is the address of the one of the device interface.
  For example this can be get as `ifconfig | grep inet` or set it to `0.0.0.0`

This will make sure that all the mqtt clients use the newer port and the bind address that
has been set once the device is connected to the cloud as in step 3.

## Verify the port and the bind address configured/set

Use the `tedge` command to print the mqtt port and bind address that has been set as below.

```shell
tedge config get mqtt.port
```

```shell
tedge config get mqtt.bind_address
```

## Step 3: Connect the thin edge device to cloud

Use the `tedge` command to connect to the desired cloud as below.

```shell
tedge connect c8y

#or

tedge connect az
```

> This will configure all the services (mosquitto, tedge-mapper-c8y.service, tedge-mapper-az.service,

Reviewer: I just got a question while reading this sentence. We also have `tedge-mapper-collectd.service`. The "all" includes this service or not?

  tedge-agent.service) to use the newly set port and the bind address.
  
Note: The step 1 and 2 can be followed in any order.

## Update to use default port and bind address

> Use the `tedge` command to set the default port (1883) and default bind address (localhost) as below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `tedge` command to set the default port (1883) and default bind address (localhost) as below.
```

```shell
tedge config unset mqtt.port
```

```shell
tedge config unset mqtt.bind_address
```

Once the port or the bind address is reverted to default, the [step 1](#Step-3:-Connect-the-thin-edge-device-to-cloud)
and 3 has to be followed to use the default port or the default bind address.

## Error case

> Below example shows that we can not set string value for the port number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below example shows that we cannot set a string value for the port number.
```

```shell
tedge config set mqtt.port '"1234"'

Error: failed to set the configuration key: mqtt.port with value: "1234".

Caused by:
    Conversion from String failed
```

## Updating the mqtt port and bind address (host) in collectd & for collectd-mapper

> Update the `collectd.conf` with the new port and host in `<Plugin mqtt>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the `collectd.conf` with the new port and host in `<Plugin mqtt>`.
```

> Restart the collectd service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, restart the collectd service.
```

```shell
sudo systemctl restart collectd.service
```

> After changing the mqtt port and host, then connect to the cloud using `tedge connect c8y/az`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After changing the mqtt port and host, then connect to the cloud using `tedge connect c8y/az`.
```

Then (Steps 1-3) the collectd-mapper has to be restarted to use the newly set port and bind address (host).

> Restart the collectd-mapper service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart the tedge-mapper-collectd service.
```

```shell

> sudo systemctl restart collectd-mapper.service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo systemctl restart tedge-mapper-collectd.service
```
